refactor HAIP and add details for mdoc profile of OID4VP over the Browser API (#122)
openid/oid4vc-haip: openid4vc-high-assurance-interoperability-profile-sd-jwt-vc-1_0.md

The following aspects are in scope of this interoperability profile:

* Profile of OID4VCI to issue IETF SD-JWT VCs (can be both remote and in-person), including
  * Wallet Attestation

> * Profile of OID4VP without using W3C Digital Credentials API [@w3c.digital_credentials_api] to present IETF SD-JWT VCs
> * Profile of OID4VP over W3C Digital Credentials API to present 
>   * IETF SD-JWT VCs 
>   * ISO mdocs

Reviewer: the "OID4VP without using W3C Digital Credentials API" language feels awkward. I *think* this conveys the same thing.

```suggestion
* Profile of OID4VP to present IETF SD-JWT VCs
* Profile of OID4VP over the W3C Digital Credentials API [@w3c.digital_credentials_api] to present 
  * IETF SD-JWT VCs 
  * ISO mdocs
```

* Protocol for User Authentication by the Wallet at a Verifier (SIOP v2)
* Profile of IETF SD-JWT VC that includes the following aspects
  * Status Management of the Credentials, including revocation
  * Cryptographic Holder Binding
  * Issuer key resolution
  * Issuer identification (as prerequisite for trust management)
* Crypto Suites

> Note that when OID4VP is used, the Wallet and the Verifier can either be remote and in-person.

Reviewer: either or 
```suggestion
Note that when OID4VP is used, the Wallet and the Verifier can either be remote or in-person.
```

* Trust Management, i.e. authorization of an issuer to issue certain types of credentials, authorization of the Wallet to be issued certain types of credentials, authorization of  the Verifier to receive certain types of credentials.
* Protocol for presentation of Verifiable Credentials for offline use-cases, e.g. over BLE.

> * Profile of OID4VP without using W3C Digital Credentials API to present ISO mdocs is defined in [@!ISO.18013-7]. For more details, also see Annex B.3 in [@!OIDF.OID4VP].

Author: ```suggestion
* Profile of OID4VCI to issue ISO mdocs is defined in [@!ISO.23220-3].
* Profile of OID4VP without using W3C Digital Credentials API to present ISO mdocs is 
defined in [@!ISO.18013-7]. For more details, also see Annex B.3 in [@!OIDF.OID4VP].
```

> * Profile of OID4VP without using W3C Digital Credentials API to present ISO mdocs is defined in [@!ISO.18013-7]. For more details, also see Annex B.3 in [@!OIDF.OID4VP].

Reviewer 2: ISO/IEC TS 18013-7:2024 is using OID4VP ID-2. HAIP would be incompatible with 18013-7 the moment it gets published which is why it is problematic to just refer to 18013-7. Instead, we should define a URI scheme version of OID4VP for mdocs in HAIP; so ISO/IEC TS 18013-7 2nd edition has a chance to point to HAIP for the URI scheme version of OID4VP.

Author: good question. I added the following question as a question to ISO:

> Will 18013-7 continue to define how to do mdocs over OID4VP without Digital Credentials API? Or should it be defined in HAIP and 18013-7 annex B can point to HAIP? Thank would resolve the fact that 18013-7 ver 1 Annex B points to OID4VP ID-2, which has diverged from the most recent version of OID4VP?

Author: #132 for now

* Trust Management, i.e. authorization of an issuer to issue certain types of credentials, authorization of the Wallet to be issued certain types of credentials, authorization of  the Verifier to receive certain types of credentials.
* Protocol for presentation of Verifiable Credentials for offline use-cases, e.g. over BLE.

> * Profile of OID4VCI to issue ISO mdocs is defined in [@!ISO.23220-3].

Reviewer 3: If we're not going to add a reference to this (due to it showing as deleted on the ISO website) we'll need to make this not a reference for the compile to succeed:

```suggestion
* Profile of OID4VCI to issue ISO mdocs is defined in ISO 23220-3.
```

* Profile of OID4VP without using W3C Digital Credentials API to present ISO mdocs is 

> defined in [@!ISO.18013-7]. For more details, also see Annex B.3 in [@!OIDF.OID4VP].

Reviewer 4: I was under the impression this draft would replace the -7 OID4VP mdoc profile. If not, how is the synchronization between this draft and changes done at ISO on -7 achieved?

Author: my understanding was that 
- since 18013-7 has been published, it will continue to define how to do mdocs over vanilla OID4VP
- this profile defines mdocs over OID4VP with browser API

> defined in [@!ISO.18013-7]. For more details, also see Annex B.3 in [@!OIDF.OID4VP].

Reviewer 3: Nit - as this is out of scope I think the reference to 18013-7 should be non-normative:

```suggestion
defined in [@ISO.18013-7]. For more details, also see Annex B.3 in [@!OIDF.OID4VP].
```

* The Credential Issuer MUST publish a mapping of every Credential Type it supports to a scope value.

> # OpenID for Verifiable Presentations without using W3C Digital Credentials API

Reviewer 5: Line 211 states that "MUST support protocol extensions for SD-JWT VC credential format profile". Does this mean this section (OpenID for Verifiable Presentations without using W3C Digital Credentials API) applies only to SD-JWT VC? If so, it should be made clear in the title.

Author: ```suggestion
# OpenID for Verifiable Presentations profile for SD-JWT VC without using W3C Digital Credentials API
```

> # OpenID for Verifiable Presentations without using W3C Digital Credentials API

Reviewer 3: I could live with 'over HTTPS'.

I definitely think we should clarify it though, as it otherwise looks very strange having sections for both:

> OpenID for Verifiable Presentations

and:

> OpenID for Verifiable Presentations over W3C Digital Credentials API

I think people would get confused as to whether the clauses in the VP section also apply when using the VP over W3C API section.

* The Credential Issuer MUST publish a mapping of every Credential Type it supports to a scope value.

> # OpenID for Verifiable Presentations profile for SD-JWT VC without using W3C Digital Credentials API

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# OpenID for Verifiable Presentations profile for SD-JWT VC over HTTPS
```

* Wallet Invocation is done via the W3C Digital Credentials API or an equivalent platform API. Custom URL schemes MUST NOT be used.
* Response Mode MUST be `w3c_dc_api.jwt`. Encryption of the response is mandatory.
* MUST support Transaction Data defined in Sections 5.4 and 7.4 of [@!OIDF.OID4VP].
* The DQCL query and response as defined in Section 6 of [@!OIDF.OID4VP] MUST be used. Presentation Exchange as defined in Sections 5.4 and 5.5 of [@!OIDF.OID4VP] MUST NOT be used. Below is the list of features in the DQCL query and response that MUST be supported:
  * tbd

## ISO mdoc specific requirements for OpenID for Verifiable Presentations over W3C Digital Credentials API

  * The Credential format identifier MUST be `mso_mdoc`.
  * mdoc Credential Format specific DCQL parameters as defined in Section 6.4.2. of [@!OIDF.OID4VP] MUST be used.
  * Verifier MAY request more than one credential in the same request.
  * DeviceResponse in the VP Token MUST contain only one mdoc. Therefore, when multiple mdocs are being returned, each mdoc should be returned in a separate DeviceResponse, each matching to a respective DCQL query.

>   * Response encryption MUST be done as defined in Section B.4.3.3.2 in [@!ISO.18013-7].

Author: I don't know if I am allowed to copy 18013-7 text into here? @martijnharing do you know if we can take 18013-7 text and put it in OIDF spec?

>   * Response encryption MUST be done as defined in Section B.4.3.3.2 in [@!ISO.18013-7].

Reviewer 6: I think the mechanism specified in 18013-7 has a number of issues which makes it not directly applicable in the context of the browser api. For example, it is not bound to the origin.

>   * Response encryption MUST be done as defined in Section B.4.3.3.2 in [@!ISO.18013-7].

Author: yeah, i think we probably need to update that a little bit, and find a way to includ (hash of) session transcript in JWE apu or apv to meet the following ISO requirements:

- mdoc authentication (device signature) must be bound to the origin, e.g. RP URL (If verifier’s value in the request is the different from the origin value passed from the platform, response must fail)
- Response encryption authentication must be bound to the origin, e.g. RP URL. 18013-5 uses `salt: SHA-256(SessionTranscriptBytes)` as key derivation input to derive session encryption keys

>   * Response encryption MUST be done as defined in Section B.4.3.3.2 in [@!ISO.18013-7].

Reviewer 2: - mdoc auth is a concept in ISO and essentially signs/macs over the SessionTranscript
- JARM response encryption is a concept in OID4VP
- ISO uses Session Encryption in -5 which in turn uses the SessionTranscript in the key derivation process.

1. We need to define SessionTranscript specifically for mdoc auth.
2. We need to define how apu/apv can be used to address the ISO requirement on "response encryption authentication must be bound to the origin". This mechanism should not be based on `SessionTranscript` since an mdoc can be returned in combination with an SD-JWT VC for example, so I'm not in favor of `salt:SHA-256(SessionTranscriptBytes)` for apu/apv. A general mechanism is needed. We could define how apu/apv values can be computed to be bound to the origin which would address ISO's requirement on binding the response encryption to the origin. This way, the mechanism can be used for mdocs, SD-JWT VCs, both, and other credential types.

>   * Response encryption MUST be done as defined in Section B.4.3.3.2 in [@!ISO.18013-7].

Author: yes, I think you are right and I have not thought through enough. we should not design in a way that would imply that JWE needs to be done in a way that is different whether mdoc is being returned or not.

>   * Response encryption MUST be done as defined in Section B.4.3.3.2 in [@!ISO.18013-7].

Author: WG discussion. 
agreement to encrypt the response. agreement to start with using JWE. agreement to have the same JWE requirements regardless of the credential format. discussion point is how to generate JWE. 

does not seem to be agreement to use JWE as defined in 18103-7 already. there seem to be some alignment on detached apu and apv being valuable?

option 1: improve how JWE with ECDH-ES is done. - change apu and apv values? 
option 2: define how to do JWE with HPKE. draft in IETF (https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-jose-hpke-encrypt-02) is not exactly stable. AAD can be set to the combination of [origin, clientId and nonce and encryption public key of the verifier].

>   * Response encryption MUST be done as defined in Section B.4.3.3.2 in [@!ISO.18013-7].

Reviewer 3: I suggest in the interests of making progress / merging this PR soon that we remove this sentence for now and have a separate discussion of the pros/cons of the different ways forward. For clarity, this results in the situation where encryption is mandatory, but how you encrypt is not defined.

```suggestion
```

>   * Response encryption MUST be done as defined in Section B.4.3.3.2 in [@!ISO.18013-7].

Reviewer 3: Agree, I've suggested we remove this sentence for now and discuss encryption separately.

>   * Response encryption MUST be done as defined in Section B.4.3.3.2 in [@!ISO.18013-7].

Author: #131

>   * Response encryption MUST be done as defined in Section B.4.3.3.2 in [@!ISO.18013-7].

Author: #132

### Session Transcript

The SessionTranscript as defined in [@ISO.18013-5] shall be used with the following changes:

* DeviceEngagementBytes MUST be null.
* EReaderKeyBytes MUST ne null

The Handover element is defined as following:

```
Handover = OID4VPDCAPIHandover
OID4VPDCAPIHandover = [
  "OID4VPDCAPIHandover"

>   clintId

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  clientId
```

  origin
  nonce
]

clientId = tstr
origin = tstr
nonce = tstr
```

* `clientId` and `nonce` parameters in the Handover MUST be the `client_id` and `nonce` parameters included in the Request from the Verifier.
* `origin` in the Handover is the origin of the Verifer, obtained from the Web-platform and/or app platform.

## IETF SD-JWT VC specific requirements for OpenID for Verifiable Presentations over W3C Digital Credentials API

  * The Credential format identifier MUST be `dc+sd-jwt`.
  * IETF SD-JWT VC Credential Format specific DCQL parameters as defined in Section 6.4.1. of [@!OIDF.OID4VP] MUST be used.

>   * When Key Binding JWT is used, `aud` value in it MUST be the origin of the Verifer, obtained from the Web-platform and/or app platform, and not `client_id` received in the Request.

Author: I think it is more about different requirements on the KB-JWT's aud depending on w3c browser API vs not w3c browser api.

>   * When Key Binding JWT is used, `aud` value in it MUST be the origin of the Verifer, obtained from the Web-platform and/or app platform, and not `client_id` received in the Request.

Reviewer 3: So firstly I can't actually find any normative definition of what `aud` in the Key Binding JWT should be. I think that should be specified in VP so I've opened an issue for that: https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/issues/350

I tend to agree with Brian that a profile in HAIP is not the right place this and it should be defined in VP, so I suggest deleting this line:

```suggestion
```

    * In the `input-descriptors` object, `id`, `name`, `purpose`, `group`, `format`, and `constraints` properties MUST be supported. In the `constraints` object, `limit_disclosure`, and `fields` properties MUST be supported. In the `fields` object, `path` and `filter` properties MUST be supported. A `path` MUST contain exactly one entry with a static path to a certain claim. A `filter` MUST only contain `type` elements of value `string` and `const` elements.
    * In the `submission_requirements` object, `name`, `rule (`pick` only)`, `count`, `from` properties MUST be supported.

> # OpenID for Verifiable Presentations over W3C Digital Credentials API

Reviewer 3: I understand that the requirements apply to both (as per . e.g. The verifier must only request encrypted responses, and the wallet must only return encrypted responses. At least that's what I understand https://openid.github.io/oid4vc-haip-sd-jwt-vc/openid4vc-high-assurance-interoperability-profile-sd-jwt-vc-wg-draft.html#section-3.3 is trying to say.

> # OpenID for Verifiable Presentations over W3C Digital Credentials API

Author: yes, requirements are intended to apply to both.

> # OpenID for Verifiable Presentations over W3C Digital Credentials API

Author: clarified

* MUST support Annex A in [@!OIDF.OID4VP] that defines how to use OID4VP over the W3C Digital Credentials API.

>   * Annex A.3.1. in [@!OIDF.OID4VP] MUST NOT be used. OID4VP requests over the W3C Digital Credentials API MUST be signed.

Reviewer 6: Why is this a requirement? Especially considering that it's up to the wallet how to continue when it cannot authenticate the RP.

Author: This is a requirement that comes from eIDAS 2.0 regulation, that mandates that the wallet must authenticate the RP/Verifier.

Author: ISO 18013-5 says: "An mDL may require mdoc reader authentication (see 9.1.4) before releasing data elements not marked as mandatory in Table 5. An mDL shall not require mdoc reader authentication as a precondition for returning any of the mandatory data elements. An mDL may offer functionality to the mDL holder to pre-authorize the return of mandatory data elements selected by the mDL holder to mDL readers using mdoc reader authentication."

and ISO 18013-7 says "The mDL data model descriptions and requirements in ISO/IEC 18013-5 shall apply in this document with the following exception: an mDL may require mdoc reader authentication as a precondition for the release of any of the mandatory data elements."

so in 18013-7, technically, mdoc reader authentication (eg verifier authentication) can be mandated as a pre-condition to release both mandatory and not mandatory data elements.

Author: If HAIP decides not mandate signing the request, that would not meet EC's requirements, we would need to alert EC as soon as possible, so that they can plan accordingly.

Reviewer 5: I support mandating the signing of the request

Author: discussed in the WG. seems to be support to allow both signed and unsigned request, to make this profile global. 

Separate questions are:
-  if we want to make any of these mandatory to support for the wallet?
- for EU, separate profiling will be required, if they want to make signing mandatory.
- Might want to add additional sentence of the value of the signing of the request

will open a separate issue on this.

```suggestion
```

Author: #129

* Wallet Invocation is done via the W3C Digital Credentials API or an equivalent platform API. Custom URL schemes MUST NOT be used.
* Response Mode MUST be `w3c_dc_api.jwt`. Encryption of the response is mandatory.

> * MUST support Transaction Data defined in Sections 5.4 and 7.4 of [@!OIDF.OID4VP].

Reviewer 6: Is this a requirement for the wallet, the RP or both?
What does this requirement imply. section 7.4 specifies the behavior how the wallet must behave when it doesn't support the parameter. But since the behavior depends significantly on the type parameter it's not clear what this requirement means.

Author: good question. I think we need to say that eIDAS compliant wallets and RPs MUST support QES transaction data type (finding out a specific value now). and for payments, `payment_data` seems to be the type value: https://github.com/EWC-consortium/eudi-wallet-rfcs/blob/main/payment-rfcs/ewc-rfc008-payment-data-confirmation.md#41-authorisation-request

Reviewer 5: Not all RP provide QES services (or payment services) so we should not mandate this for all. Maybe this could be a conditional requirement (only for signatures/payment use cases).

Author: #130

* The DQCL query and response as defined in Section 6 of [@!OIDF.OID4VP] MUST be used. Presentation Exchange as defined in Sections 5.4 and 5.5 of [@!OIDF.OID4VP] MUST NOT be used. Below is the list of features in the DQCL query and response that MUST be supported:
  * tbd

## ISO mdoc specific requirements for OpenID for Verifiable Presentations over W3C Digital Credentials API

  * The Credential format identifier MUST be `mso_mdoc`.
  * mdoc Credential Format specific DCQL parameters as defined in Section 6.4.2. of [@!OIDF.OID4VP] MUST be used.
  * Verifier MAY request more than one credential in the same request.

>   * DeviceResponse in the VP Token MUST contain only one mdoc. Therefore, when multiple mdocs are being returned, each mdoc should be returned in a separate DeviceResponse, each matching to a respective DCQL query.

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure if this is a good limitation, see also the issue with binding a single response to a single DCQL query in https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/issues/336

Reviewer 3: I think this restriction makes sense given the constraints we currently have it doesn't make sense to have more than one mdoc in a single VP Token.

(I also agree we should look into that issue you raised.)

Author: yes, made a suggestion here: https://github.com/openid/oid4vc-haip-sd-jwt-vc/pull/122/files#r1870520704

Author: opened https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/issues/397 to continue this discussion

>   * DeviceResponse in the VP Token MUST contain only one mdoc. Therefore, when multiple mdocs are being returned, each mdoc should be returned in a separate DeviceResponse, each matching to a respective DCQL query.

Author: not sure I follow. but yes, there might be multiple deviceResponse objects in a VP Token, but given the way DCQL and VP Token is define, there should be only one mdoc per deviceResponse.

>   * DeviceResponse in the VP Token MUST contain only one mdoc. Therefore, when multiple mdocs are being returned, each mdoc should be returned in a separate DeviceResponse, each matching to a respective DCQL query.

Reviewer 6: Note that there is an issue that is slightly related to this: https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/issues/336
That issue is the other way round, but it may result in changing the structure / requirements for how to respond to a query.

>   * DeviceResponse in the VP Token MUST contain only one mdoc. Therefore, when multiple mdocs are being returned, each mdoc should be returned in a separate DeviceResponse, each matching to a respective DCQL query.

Reviewer 4: that's what I meant

>   * DeviceResponse in the VP Token MUST contain only one mdoc. Therefore, when multiple mdocs are being returned, each mdoc should be returned in a separate DeviceResponse, each matching to a respective DCQL query.

Author: that is what this text intends to say. are there ways to make that clearer?

```suggestion
  * Each DeviceResponse in the VP Token MUST contain one mdoc. Therefore, when multiple mdocs are being returned, each mdoc should be returned in a separate DeviceResponse, each matching to a respective DCQL query.
```

  * Response encryption MUST be done as defined in Section B.4.3.3.2 in [@!ISO.18013-7].

### Session Transcript

The SessionTranscript as defined in [@ISO.18013-5] shall be used with the following changes:

* DeviceEngagementBytes MUST be null.
* EReaderKeyBytes MUST ne null

The Handover element is defined as following:

```
Handover = OID4VPDCAPIHandover
OID4VPDCAPIHandover = [
  "OID4VPDCAPIHandover"

>   clientId

Reviewer 6: From a security perspective, what kind of attacks are mitigated by inclusion of the clientID in the sessiontranscript?
Inclusion of the clientId also has other issues, like which value is used if there are multiple signatures, or if the wallet ignores RP authentication.

Author: yes, we need clientId as audience restriction.

Reviewer 4: The wallet must decide which audience a certain credential presentation is intended for, even in case of multiple signatures. It's a selection 1 out of n in case of multiple signatures.

    * In the `input-descriptors` object, `id`, `name`, `purpose`, `group`, `format`, and `constraints` properties MUST be supported. In the `constraints` object, `limit_disclosure`, and `fields` properties MUST be supported. In the `fields` object, `path` and `filter` properties MUST be supported. A `path` MUST contain exactly one entry with a static path to a certain claim. A `filter` MUST only contain `type` elements of value `string` and `const` elements.
    * In the `submission_requirements` object, `name`, `rule (`pick` only)`, `count`, `from` properties MUST be supported.

# OpenID for Verifiable Presentations over W3C Digital Credentials API

> The requirements for the Wallet and the Verifier, unless specified otherwise:

Author: can you please open an issue? might be something like a note "Wallet and Verifier can fulfill these requirements only conditional to platforms supporting these features." ?

> The requirements for the Wallet and the Verifier, unless specified otherwise:

Reviewer 3: Sure - I opened https://github.com/openid/oid4vc-haip-sd-jwt-vc/issues/136 - will resolve this conversation then

* MUST support Annex A in [@!OIDF.OID4VP] that defines how to use OID4VP over the W3C Digital Credentials API.

>   * The Wallet MUST support both signed and unsigned requests defined in Annex A.3.1 and A.3.2 of [@!OIDF.OID4VP]. The Verifier MUST support signed and/or unsigned requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * The Wallet MUST support both signed and unsigned requests defined in Annex A.3.1 and A.3.2 of [@!OIDF.OID4VP]. The Verifier must support signed requests, unsigned requests, or both.
```

* Wallet Invocation is done via the W3C Digital Credentials API or an equivalent platform API. Custom URL schemes MUST NOT be used.

> * Response Mode MUST be `w3c_dc_api.jwt`. Encryption of the response is mandatory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Response Mode MUST be `w3c_dc_api.jwt`. Encryption of the response is REQUIRED.
```

Reviewer 3: Think we just MUST rather than required in HAIP? Also the Response Mode has changed...

```suggestion
* Response Mode MUST be `dc_api.jwt`. The response MUST be encrypted.
```

        </front>
</reference>

<reference anchor="ISO.18013-7" target="https://www.iso.org/standard/82772.html">
        <front>
          <title>ISO/IEC DTS 18013-7 Personal identification — ISO-compliant driving license — Part 7: Mobile driving license (mDL) add-on functions</title>
          <author>
            <organization> ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 17 Cards and security devices for personal identification</organization>
          </author>
          <date year="2024"/>
        </front>
</reference>

> 

Reviewer 8: We are missing a reference to 23220-3 (that is used before - line 87), but it is not published yet and shows as deleted on the iso page?

```suggestion

<reference anchor="ISO.23220-3" target="https://www.iso.org/standard/79125.html">
        <front>
          <title>ISO/IEC DTS 23220-3 Cards and security devices for personal identification — Building blocks for identity management via mobile devices</title>
          <author>
            <organization> ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 17 Cards and security devices for personal identification</organization>
          </author>
          <date year="2023"/>
        </front>
</reference>

```

Author: yeah, I don't know why it shows as cancelled, but reluctant to add a reference to a draft that says deleted....
